There are new archive buildings in the world?
Well, Canadians just opened the new Presbyterian Center last year.
The public record office in North Britain has a new building.
The, um, well, one of the ironies is the Bundesarchiv in Germany has a relatively new building in Koblenz, but they'll be moving to Berlin at some point.
There was a piece in the New York Times recently about the particular problems in Germany, of course.
I guess it's hardware, it's software, it's... East German stuff.
The East German stuff that is now totally inaccessible are... Well, they're doing what they call data archaeology.
Data.
Isn't that a wonderful phrase?
I love that.
I think we avoid as much of that.
Do you do data archaeology?
Well, we are basically set up so that we don't have to do it.
We came very close to the kind of stuff that Marilyn Bitzenthaler does for the paper with the White House backup tapes from the Armstrong litigation, tapes containing Oliver North's email.
Some of those tapes were so old and were in such physically bad shape that we had to deal with them as media.
Normally when you're dealing with electronic records, the last thing you want to get into is physical media.
If we got something in from an agency that has a media problem, we send it back and say, give us a good copy.
And then we make our own copies on media that we have a relatively high level of trust in.
And so the thing you do is get rid of the bad media.
You don't try to preserve it, but because this was subject to court orders, we had to preserve the original media.
This is extremely expensive when we start operating at that level.
Just for record, you didn't give me your title, so I can have it.
Okay.
I'm Director of Electronic Records Programs.
Well, that's quite an interesting position.
Yeah.
We're still figuring out what it means.
So your division has been in the news a little bit lately.
Mm-hmm.
Tell me, would you give me an idea of, do we have an idea of what the percentage is of
archival material that's coming into the National Archives that's electronic and not... It's paper.
It's kind of apples and oranges because paper and I think all other records that come here are measured in cubic feet.
With electronic records, that simply is not a relevant measure since the first thing we do with everything is change the cubic footage since we're creating copies, usually on a different media.
And even if they haven't used the same media we do,
Since we have certain standards about how it's technically recorded, it may wind up occupying a different number of volumes on our copy than it did on the A to Z copy.
That said, I would say it's still a relatively very small percentage of what's coming in that's coming in an electron.
The hard copy records that we get are very often thirty years old.
still a big pipeline of paper records that will be coming here for decades and decades.
In fact, we did, the agency did an analysis of our record center programs where we store records temporarily for agency.
And we figured if the record centers went out of business in the year 2000, 50 years later they still would have the majority of all the records that are in there today because they have this long retention period.
Some of those eventually would come into the National Archives.
What I would say is true, in spite of that very small percentage, is we're the fastest growing operation.
We're also the... I mean, we've gone from... When I came here ten years ago, 1988 at the very end, in the prior fiscal year, the agency had received 159 files of digital material.
In 1988?
We basically doubled that every two years until, a couple years ago, we got up to 10,000 files in one year.
Almost 10,000, something like that.
8,700.
But what we're looking at right now is the need to bring in, in the next few years, something between 6 million and 30 million files.
And frankly, we can't do it in a way in the world.
How are electronic files delivered to you?
On physical media.
And we have some very preliminary efforts going on to start tests transferring the stuff over the Internet.
We haven't pushed that in the past because most of the files that come in here are so big that they're not well suited to Internet transfer.
In fact, we asked an agency a few years ago.
to send us some sample records over the internet so we could see what it was they were talking about, because they were unable to tell us technically what the stuff looked like.
Well, they attached a file to an email message, and they wound up not only crashing our connection, the whole agency's connection to the internet, but the server that connection was on was also serving the Office of the Archivist of the United States, the head of the agency.
But his whole office was without computer access for two days.
Two days.
Do you remember the agency just that they did?
Yes, actually.
So you've got a tape play.
I won't give you the details.
That's a great story.
Armed Forces Pathology Institute.
Pathology?
Yes.
And what were they sending for you?
They have a database that basically captures data on every type of wound or injury to the human body that they've ever seen.
so that they can develop medical knowledge on that and treat different types of things.
What happened, actually, was instead of sending us a few sample records, they sent the whole database.
It was 200 megabytes.
Did you receive it?
Did it all— Oh, we received it for two days straight.
I mean, the problem is our server would get it, and then after a while it would say, I can't deal with a 200 megabyte attachment, and it would stop the message.
It actually would crash.
And the Pathology Institute would receive an automatic message from the Institute saying,
transfer incomplete.
So it would resend it every three minutes.
Starting from scratch?
From scratch.
And it took two days to get their system.
Well, it took us probably a day to figure out why our system kept crashing.
Because when it crashes every three minutes, you don't have much of an opportunity to figure out what's going wrong.
After one day, we figured out exactly what was going wrong.
And contact with people.
So nobody was really alert to the fact that this stuff was?
No, because one of the nice things about the internet is the guaranteed
end-to-end transmission.
You submit something there, and you don't need to worry about what problems the network has in getting it to the recipient.
It'll keep sending it until it gets there.
That's a nice story.
Yeah.
When you talk about an individual file, 159 to 10,000... Give me a call when you have some time, and I'll... It'll be really in the next couple of months.
Okay, that's fine.
Ken, thanks very much.
You're welcome.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
When we talk about one file, we're not talking about one file that could be anything.
In the six-month period, we did a review of the files that came in that varied from 30K to 2 gigabytes.
And the extremes will probably get worse, because of the millions of files I'm talking about, at least 24 million are e-mail rates.
These are going to be a couple K.
24 million?
Yeah.
Just from the White House.
Clinton White House.
And these all have to be preserved, right?
Well, there's a question about that.
This is what the litigation is all about, right?
Well, actually, in this particular case of the Clinton White House, they don't have technology available that makes it easy for them to segregate out stuff that we really want to preserve.
So they're saving everything.
But this isn't terribly efficient at all, is it?
No.
This is what we're talking about.
Well, in terms of current operations, it's much easier for them to save everything than to try to figure out what's... Well, with the EOP, we would probably assume a substantial portion would be worth saving.
But you look at any email, and a lot of it by any reasonable standards, it's just trivial.
I do tons of email, and I save maybe 10% on disk.
Yeah.
and the other stuff is chaff.
Who wants it?
Who's ever going to use it?
So you don't have any filtering device in there.
And the problem is basically there aren't off-the-shelf products you can buy that will do that for you.
This is almost like getting a recording of every telephone call.
And who wants that either?
Calling home to see if I should pick something up at the store.
What relevance does that have in the National Archives?
But these are issues that you're basically
being forced to deal with, I guess.
Yeah.
I mean, my hope is someday.
One of the problems we've seen... Now, what's going on over there on our live systems?
They can do this, because an email comes in, and unless the person who gets it or sends it explicitly says, this is not a record.
I'm inviting my friend to go to lunch.
Clearly not a good record.
Unless they say that, a copy is automatically taped.
Automatically.
Yeah.
Automatically taped.
They had to develop their own software to make that happen.
That was as a result of communication.
But there's no filter.
The problem for us is when we started looking into, what are we going to do?
And at a time when we thought it was only six million files, which was true.
It turns out state-of-the-art information technology cannot handle collections as big as two million files.
So we're actually
just in the process of finalizing a contract with the San Diego Supercomputer Center to say, help us to figure out how to deal with this.
They fortunately had a contract with the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
Is that a government facility?
No, I think it's actually part of the California University system.
But they have a lot of contracts from the federal government, from the state of California and local governments out there.
to my knowledge, one of the two biggest supercomputer centers in the world.
If you know what, I am interested in, as I said, I've been to Cornell.
I'm interested in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the Viking data.
Do you get involved in that at all, with that Viking data?
On the periphery.
In fact, there may have been a message recently that somebody from JPL had data they wanted to send us.
And they claim to have been negotiating with me on this for two years.
Well, thanks a lot.
This may be a scientist I met two years ago, but it certainly hasn't been going on.
Well, NARA hasn't officially taken a position.
We asked the National Research Council a couple years ago, around 95, to give us some advice
on what should be done about long-term preservation of data from big science, like NASA, the Department of Energy, NOAA, and so on.
And the answer they came back with was basically any decent data should be preserved.
But it should be preserved by the science agencies in subject-oriented data centers.
NASA has over here at Goddard Space Science Data Center.
The Geological Survey operates the AEROS data center, Earth Resources Observation System out in South Dakota.
NOAA has the National Climatic Data Center down in North Carolina, and the National Geophysical and Solar-Terrestrial Data Center in Boulder, Colorado, and the Oceanographic Data Center here in Washington.
So these are kind of good models.
Obviously, this recommendation doesn't give us heartaches, because we haven't taken an official position on it.
Professionally, I have a level of comfort knowing that these are organizations which exist to preserve and provide access to this kind of information.
There's so much out there that has no home once the agency's done with it that I'm not going to worry if the science agencies are taking care of their stuff.
Unfortunately, the track record isn't obvious.
JPL has a multi-million dollar initiative that I think was called Pathfinder.
go back and recover data that they had been keeping but which had gotten into a state that they couldn't read it anymore things like the tapes deteriorated or they had never made sure they had the technical documentation they recovered a lot of that and are actually publishing it on cd rome but is this a questionary tale for you here at the national archives sure it is anywhere we look there are questions in the cases of records in jeopardy
are so common that it would be hard for us to say, where's the case where they're really taking care of us?
Well, it really is an interesting situation.
We have this paradigm shift that everyone talks about, and there are genuine, legitimate concerns about the preservation of digital material.
Oh, yeah.
And there's a spectrum.
I don't know if you're aware of the... There was a conference, and there's now a...
an electronic discussion group sponsored by the Getty Foundation called Time and Bits.
Is that the one they get to that?
Yeah.
Getty?
Time and Bits, like B-I-T-S?
Yeah, but and is just N. Time and Bits.
Yeah.
They have a lot of, actually they have people from all over participating in this, including Stuart Brand from the Whole Earth Catalog, Brewster Kahle,
gets involved every now and then.
He runs an operation out in San Francisco called The Internet Archives, where he just scans the World Wide Web and copies everything except where the owners have a certain copyright.
And what does he do with it?
He keeps it.
And he has an archive?
Yeah.
And what medium is he saving on?
He's saving on digital longitudinal tape.
Is that pretty reliable stuff?
There's a good chance that when we, periodically, we look at our preservation media, because there's no, well, we look at what media we're using for preservation, because there is no archival media in the digital world.
And I would expect if we looked at it within the next year or two, we'd probably decide to go to that.
You said there is no preservation media in the digital world.
Well, if there was something that was permanent.
In fact, we had the National Institutes of Standards
standards in technology, probably 10, 11 years ago now, do a study for us on digital media, specifically on optical disks.
And they came back and said, manufacturers' claims that this stuff will last 100 years are probably understated.
Their bottom line was, so what?
In five years, you're going to have trouble finding drives to read this stuff.
And we've seen that happen.
I know several major institutions that have decided to go there.
optical disks and have found their systems obsolete before they were fully implemented.
What institution is just out of curiosity?
Well, what used to be the largest, well, it still is, the largest social science data archive in the world is the ICPSR, which is the Inter-University Consortium for Social and Political Research, housed at the University of Michigan.
Some years ago, maybe six, seven, they decided to go to
optical disk.
And if I remember correctly in their case, the company actually went out of existence before the system was delivered.
Another company picked it up, but they were in London and they weren't willing to give them any support in Michigan.
The Space Telescope Institute up here at Johns Hopkins, I think, had a similar experience.
Our colleagues at the National Archives of Canada had a similar experience.
And basically any
collecting institute that I've talked to that made the switch to optical disks that wound up to this kind of problem.
So do they have material that they can't access?
Well, no.
Fortunately, most of them still had stuff on tape, because you always keep people copying them.
In fact, the Canadians hedged their beds, and they made one copy on tape and one on optical.
Tape is a horrendous medium.
It doesn't last.
It self-destructs.
It's extremely fragile.
It's sensitive to molds.
humidity, changes in temperature, but I kind of regard it as the devil I know.
That stuff will be lucky the last two years.
And the problem is, because of the market drive to miniaturization, the tape gets less and less stable.
That tape is not inherently stiff enough to pass flat over a tape head, which means you can't really use it to
So to make it, they stretch it.
It's a little stiff.
But the molecules remember their natural configuration.
Over a period of three years or so, they're going to go back.
These basically are one shot for me.
I use them once.
I transcribe them.
I save them.
I have all my tapes from my first book, 250 of them.
I haven't gone back to see them.
It would be amazing if you'd cut it.
Thankfully, I do have the transcripts.
You have a little more tolerance on analog.
Because, you know, they use this for digital, too.
But if you lose a little bit of tape, you've lost thousands of bits.
Whereas on the stuff we use, you lose a little bit of tape and hardly lost anything.
So, um, have you read Jeff Rothenberg?
I understand there's a revised copy of that.
There was a piece in the New York Times that there's a revised?
Yeah.
There was a piece in the New York Times last week, and it was, uh,
I'll be happy to e-mail the New York Times story to you if you want, but it did mention that Jeff Rothenberg has a revised copy of that.
Is this the one that James Glick wrote?
No, Jeff Rothenberg was a scientist.
No, but I mean the article in the Times.
I'm not sure.
Glick had one in the Sunday Magazine.
Two weeks ago.
Glick is terrific.
He wrote that book on it.
Yeah.
In fact, when I was talking to him for the article, I didn't know how he pronounced his name, and I didn't realize who he was.
In fact, I didn't even have this chaos software.
But yeah, and it was a good article because he has a bit of perspective that we usually hear from people who act like, if you don't save everything that's on computers.
In fact, he starts with a quote from Stuart Brand.
Is it in the New York Times Magazine?
Yeah.
Easter Sunday.
He starts quoting Brandt, who said something like, more information has been lost in the digital era than all of history.
And my immediate reaction to that was, well, more information has been recorded in the last ten years than all of history.
So what?
So what is your attitude on this?
I mean, tell me about this, about the gloom and doom?
Well, there are different values.
In fact, they have different values in our community.
I actually started out my career wanting to specialize in not so much the fall of the Roman Empire, but what happened to the tribes that came out of the German forests that wound up governing former Roman provinces.
I just discovered there wasn't
much of a market.
But having tried to specialize in that field, I know that historians can, and other disciplines like anthropology and archaeology, can glean incredible insights out of scanty information.
I'm probably a little bit more sanguine than a lot of historians who are afraid to lose
one draft in the sequence of 10 drafts of a document.
And I understand how that document came about.
But we're getting a lot of criticism from the historical profession, but specifically the people who do diplomatic history and political history, which is a small specialization within the history of the historical field, that we're not emphasizing keeping all the drafts of all the documents that are produced in the government
at high levels.
In their view, by the time it gets to be an official government record, it's lost all its interest.
I call that, summarize it, saying they're digging for dirt.
Whereas we start from a, well, NARA has a dual role.
We have oversight responsibility for the whole government on how they create and manage records.
And then we have this National Archives, the Presidential Libraries, where we preserve what we think is the historical value.
But we start with a premise that the government will be better if the government has better records, if they're reliable, accurate, complete, retirement, and so on.
The service you do to the nation is going to be better.
And that for historical purposes, it would be a lot better for us to be able to say, you know, what we've got here is definitive.
It's the stuff on which the government based its decisions and so on.
So we have this emphasis on quality records management.
And in quality records management, the kind of stuff that historians are looking for at the margins,
shouldn't be there, because government servants should know enough that they do jobs, their jobs according to very high standards.
And you're not finding the kind of stuff you may find.
There have been above notes passed on government email systems for several administrations.
I'm sure there's lots of people in journalism and other fields who love to see that stuff.
But there is selection going on about what to keep and what not to keep.
So who's making the qualitative decisions?
Basically, that's our authority.
And we're actually about to start a business process re-engineering act to re-look at how we do this in total.
But typically, I mean, there's some things that are fairly obvious.
That if it's agency policy,
If it was issued as a directive, if it tells you how the agency was organized, we're going to keep all that on top of any question.
You can almost assume that any cabinet-level official, any agency head, we're going to want their correspondence files.
Then you start looking at what's the agency's business and what are the records that best document that business.
And there's a lot, I mean, archival theory about what are the best records to save is kind of all over the place.
In general, archivists around the world in the last 10 years have focused on what we call evidential values.
That is, the stuff that will tell you how the government worked, what the decisions were, what the follow-up decisions.
Our law, the Federal Records Act, also says we have to consider the value of the information contained in the records.
And if we get something in excess of
The number is 300,000 visitors or visits to the National Archives in Washington every year.
There are comparable numbers in our field of operations.
Of the 300,000-plus, at least 300,000 are people doing family history.
They're interested in the information of the records, not what it tells you about what the government was doing.
The record of their grandparents' immigration or
parents' service and all of them, too, that kind of stuff.
They're not interested in policy files and so on.
So I think our law is reasonable in that the American people are telling us this stuff is valuable to them.
We're providing a service by making sure this stuff gets kept and it's available to them, even though most archivists would tell us that that's not the stuff you should do.
Do you have any sense of how much of what you're saving is ever going to be used, is ever going to be accessed?
There's a huge range.
You could say, on average, most of the paper records in this building are stored in what are called archives boxes.
One of those boxes is a third of a cubic foot.
You can assume that the average box in the National Archives is not pulled off the shelf once in ten years.
On the other hand, downtown
The main archives building, we have a room with 98 microphone readers for the stuff that's in such high use that we microfilmed it.
There are copies around the country, and there are even copies sold by private companies.
But there are a lot of days, and you wait in line to get at one of those 98 microphone readers, and we have to sit.
You know, you can have it for two hours, but then you're going to have to get off, because other people are waiting.
Of the stuff we have in electronic form,
There's some stuff that I'd be surprised if it ever gets used.
There's some stuff that I'd be surprised if more than a week went by that didn't get used.
The most highly active stuff is military casualty information for a variety of reasons.
It's in constant demand.
Now, do you make high copies of any of this electronic stuff?
For the casualty stuff we do, because it's changed over time.
When I first came ten years ago, there were a lot of communities around the country who were building memorials to their
and the war did from Vietnam, so they were warning the lists from them.
More recently, the demand is people doing family history.
Occasionally, it's people looking for their buddies that they served with in Vietnam, or what happened to their buddies.
So for that kind of clientele, because the demand is high enough, we actually print the stuff out in advance.
Although, most recently, we've just started sticking it on the website and saying, you want these printed lists?
Just download it.
If you write to us or call us, we're going to have to charge you a minimum fee for mailing it to you if you want to download it.
Sure, it is for free.
So are people using that?
Yeah.
In fact, even when they call us, that's my first recommendation.
Why should you pay us $5?
We can get it for free.
And that saves you, uh, yeah, it saves us work.
It allows us to deal with those things where we really need to do some hand-holding.
I read in a couple of papers that you have policies on refreshing of your
Could you tell me a little bit about that?
Well, basically, as I said, there's no archival medium.
If there was, we wouldn't use it.
It wouldn't matter if there was one, because as long as the technology continues to change, you've got this problem.
If the medium lasts, the equipment becomes obsolete.
You can't buy it, and you can't afford to maintain it after a while.
Since we started taking stuff in, which was 1971 or 72, in digital form, we've been using one form of mag taper or another.
And since then, we've had a policy that when any tape gets to be 10 years old, we're going to copy it to something new.
And that's been fairly good.
Some organizations use a five-year refreshment cycle.
We've been using a 10-year.
And as long as nothing goes wrong, that's adequate.
We also do an annual sample to make sure nothing's going wrong.
In fact, we discovered some tapes that were bought in the late 80s started going bad within three years, so we had a huge effort to get everything off of those tapes.
Have you lost stuff?
Probably over time we lost some stuff.
Not a lot.
We have a—and we get better at what we can recover.
We have a routine now where—since we have two copies of everything, it used to be the old copy was
literally the backup copy.
If your master goes bad, try the backup.
Because, with an irony that, I think it was around 87, 88, the predecessor unit had a little bit of money, which was extremely scarce.
They bought 5,000 tapes and said, at least we have this to use for preservation purposes.
Turns out it was a bad batch.
And this stuff was inherently unstable.
So we're getting both masters and backups going bad.
So we've adjusted our system that we can actually go in and take pieces out of the two of them and recombine them.
Very labor-intensive, unfortunately.
But we can do that, which is not the way computers normally process the whole file.
So because of that, and because we've developed things like we have a tape drive across the hall where we've taken the shell off, and we'll have one of the technical people standing there with a cotton swab with alcohol, wiping the tape as it goes through,
Because otherwise, what's happening is the tape is disintegrating chemically, and the chemicals, when it heats up and it's moving on the drive, the chemicals come to the surface, they reach a flash point, they melt, and then they solidify, jamming themselves to all the parts of the tape drive.
So by standing there with the alcohol, we can get through one, and that's all we need, because one should make a cup.
Yeah.
You know, we see that in paper.
Roger Studd at Harvard was telling me that he has some
and he's the curator of Rare Books in the Fulton Library, he bought some old mimeographed records of the Black Panther Party up in there, and he said, these things were mimeographed in the West paper, and he said, these papers have, at best, one look.
So if I'm a scholar coming in and I want to look at it, he's not going to let me look at it, or we'll make a deal.
You get a grant, and maybe I can copy them, you know, and I'll let you look at them.
But he said, these papers, he believes there is just one read left.
That's kind of what you're saying with the tapes, isn't it?
If the medium starts going bad, the first thing we do is just copy it.
Because once you've got the copy, you can do whatever you want.
And that's the essence of migration, isn't it?
That phrase, actually, what we're doing is copy.
Well, because basically everything we have here, with a few exceptions, is in a format that's not dependent on any specific technology.
So all we have to do is copy it over.
The newer stuff that's been created, basically since the rise of PCs, which is software-dependent, the Jeff Rothenberg problem, were in a bind because you cannot translate it into a neutral format without losing something.
You could translate any word processing document into plain ASCII, but you lose the fonts, you lose the pages.
Well, you might not necessarily lose the page layout.
You probably lose footnotes.
So you lose a lot of important stuff about the contents.
But then, I don't care what word processing software you're using today, I feel fairly certain in 30 years no one's going to know what the word word processing means.
Or if they do, it's sort of like punch cards.
In a few years we'll be talking to our computers.
Well, I've got a thing now, which is maybe they say it's 90% effective.
10% that isn't makes it maddening.
You see the stupid words that come up, and they don't go through a spelling check because they're real words.
So I try to transcribe these tapes by talking into them, but I can see where the technology is just going to get there.
Yeah, it will get there.
And you think the word processing as we know it is going to be, typing skills are going to vanish?
Well, it's interesting.
There was a point where I used to say, I love word processing.
It's really great for editing, but I can't think of one of these machines.
I have to think with a pen in my hand.
Then one day I noticed it's been a long time since I used a pen.
Yeah, no, my best writing is on one of these things.
And then the revision that it allows you to do is, you couldn't live without it.
Yeah.
Let's talk briefly, and then I don't get up to time, but you said that
You studied in the great books program in order to be taught in it.
I got taught in it.
You got taught it?
Yeah.
Am I telling me a little bit about that?
It was, I would say, inspired by St.
John's.
I don't remember exactly when it was.
And when was this?
When I taught there, it was the early 70s, from early 70 to 74.
In what department?
It was called the General Program of Liberal Studies.
It was a three-year major in which each semester the students had a
four-hour seminar in the great books.
And it differed from St.
John's in that we had what we called tutorials, which are more typical lecture classes in, actually in subjects related to the great books, like they took philosophy, they took literature, they took, well, I was there because one of the tutorials was in history of science.
They had three semesters of history of science.
They had some classes in art.
So the idea, I think, was helps them understand the great books better by getting some context.
We had one of the great lights of St.
John come up, and he thought this was horrible that we were getting lecture classes.
Right?
Yeah.
Well, they don't even say they have teachers over there.
They are tours or whatever.
Yeah.
That's why we call these things tutorials.
I see.
How do you feel about this?
I mean, I don't mean to get off into the question of the literary canon or anything like that.
But I'm quite interested in seeing what this is all about.
I'd like to see what kind of a kid today is interested in going off to study the great books in the late 1990s.
Yeah, it would be interesting.
When I was teaching in the 70s, which is an interesting period, because one of my colleagues who came the same year I did, and it turned out he and I had been in the same undergraduate school together, but he was a chemistry major at Fordham in New York.
So we'd never met as undergraduates, but we wound up teaching in the same department at Notre Dame.
The way he described it is, when we came, there was no question there would be a revolution.
The only question was when it would be.
Three years later, they were all Republicans.
But that department at the time tended to get much better students than the average department at the university.
Very high.
College board scores, very high grade averages, a lot of students on merit-type scholarships and so on.
Some extremely bright kids.
I had some students who I was absolutely sure were a lot smaller than I was.
There was just no question about it.
You know, not everybody was that way.
But it was interesting that in that era, especially with the attitude of the 60s and 70s, that kids were willing to study the great books.
And how did you migrate from the Great Books?
Now you were an archivist?
Well, actually, the Great Books was kind of an anomaly, because I've always had a historical interest, almost like I was born as a historian.
I can remember running home from school the first week of second grade, because in second grade we got to study history, and I now have history texts that I can read, and I ran home and started reading it.
And it just was never any question of what I was going to be when I grew up.
And I became a historian of science because I've always been fascinated by science.
In some ways, I think it's simpler than history.
If it wasn't, we'd have much more robust social sciences and human sciences.
But at the time I was entering grad school, it was NDEA Title IV, which was a program that the federal government had created in response to Sputnik, that we had to improve science education in America.
So the history of science departments around the country were doing great.
And it turned out that in Fordham, we had such a tremendous professor in medieval history that all of the top students in the history department wanted to go to grad school in medieval history, so we were all going to be competing for the same grad schools.
I thought, well, I have enough of a science background that I can get into history of science.
So I went into that.
And while I was in grad school, they cut off Title IV money, and the history of science department started going down.
So it came time for me to look for a job.
Because Notre Dame had this undergraduate program, the only condition was I had to teach great books.
Fortunately, I came out of Fordham, which still, at that time, I don't know what it's doing today.
But the curriculum in Fordham in the 1960s was essentially a 19th century American Protestant college curriculum.
If you look back to it.
Fordham was?
Yeah.
I mean, this was a Jesuit school.
But I had a friend at the University of Pennsylvania who did his dissertation on scientific education in early America.
And he discovered that in all these classic American schools like Harvard and Yale, when they were still closely associated with their religious origins,
You had four years of philosophy, four years of theology, a strong liberal heartstring.
In Fordham, if you enrolled there as a Catholic, you got four years of theology.
No matter what faith you were, you got four years of philosophy.
So I at least had exposure to a lot of the great books.
It wasn't that hard to get into that.
But my own research, a lot of it's been in the quantitative area.
And in the mid-70s,
the National Archives decided to create a new program for digital records.
So they started that in the 70s.
Well, they actually had a committee formed in 68.
Wow.
I have to realize it went back.
Yeah.
The impetus came... I'm getting to the point where I'm forgetting names.
The impetus came from the Social Science Research Council
which created a committee in the mid-'60s to look at the long-term value of digital social science data.
And it was a Yale professor who chaired that committee.
In fact, his name became the Association of the Committee.
For some reason, I'm blocking it right now.
And they really recommended this data, even though it's been seen as a convenience to get processes done.
It's a lot of important data, especially census-type stuff.
It really should be preserved.
So the National Archives
formed an internal work group to look at that.
And over a couple of years, they decided they agreed with the social scientists and recommended a permanent program to be established.
So it was in 72, at a branch level in 75, and it was upgraded to a division.
And they started really expanding.
And through a colleague of mine who taught quantitative history at the University of Illinois in Chicago, I was just offered a job here.
I hadn't even applied for it.
working for the federal government.
But then when I found out what it was about, and when they brought me on, they assigned me to work with all the major science agencies.
So I was extremely happy.
To me, this was living history.
You had to go around and find out what are some of the best scientists in the world.
At that time, there were four Nobel laureates at NIH.
Interview them about what they're doing.
Do they think their data is useful to other scientists?
Then you did that?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, my real interests were more than physical science.
But I actually wound up going to work at NIH.
I swore a four Nobel Laureate semester.
I've been out of NIH now ten years, but the place was an amazing place to work.
In fact, I have a ski buddy who started working at NIH two years after I was born, in 1947.
He started working there.
He's still there emeritus.
He's a scientist.
And when I first met him in the early 80s, he would say, this place is magic.
It was just thrilling to be in that environment, to watch how the scientists were working.
One of the reasons it was magic is because unlike the people who get NIH grants, they're not on a three-year grant cycle.
They're tenured federal employees.
So they could do long-term research projects that if you had to show your university, you were able to get a grant every three years.
You wouldn't attack this guy who's a specialist in the transport of
fatty acids and other stuff like that in the blood system.
His research didn't pay off for about three years.
But it's paid off so much that now he's going all over the world getting international awards for lifetime's work.
So how do you distinguish between an archivist and a librarian?
The basic difference is that we deal with records.
Records, rather than information that's designed to be published, and therefore essentially self-contained, freestanding,
Records are simply instruments and byproducts of doing business.
They're not produced for a general audience.
They're produced for people with whom you're interacting in the course of business.
And basically, to understand a record, you have to understand the context in which it was created.
So our discipline is really developed around things like
How do you help records creators to create authentic, reliable records?
How do you help people coming in 50 years after the fact define stuff in records?
Because records are rarely ever organized by subject.
We don't organize things the way a library does.
Archives organize them by where they came from.
By their provenance, yeah.
The fundamental principle of archives is called the principle.
So even if you have related materials that would really give context, they aren't going to be together.
If you have something that comes from the State Department, about the Vietnam War, and the Defense Department, and the CIA, that's all going to be... But we could help you find it.
And there have been cases when records after the fact have been reorganized by subjects.
It's kind of offensive.
There must be records from all over the place.
All over the place.
But if you came here and talked to one of our consultants who's familiar with that era, they would ask you about your interests.
And then they would ask themselves, now, what government agencies were in a business that would have involved them in that?
And they would steer you to the records of the relevant agencies.
And they have pretty good databases to help.
No.
Most of the finding aids today are on paper.
Some of them are in microform.
We have a longstanding project.
I think it goes back now probably at least 15 years, if not 20, to create a huge database that will tell people about everything in the National Archives.
But there's an implementation for Still Pictures.
I think they extended that to motion pictures, but most of the records are textual.
Well, every once in a while, I just did a story on the New York Public Library and their Romanov collection, which they acquired not long after the Soviet Union took over, and they were getting rid of all the royal stuff, and the New York Public Library bought a spectacular collection of material.
Well, they had an exhibition a couple of months ago,
And these books in the library were scattered all over the place, because there were books, let's say, on geography.
There were books on Slavic history.
And now this is a thing that almost cried out for Provenants, to keep the collection together.
And it's almost like exactly the opposite of what you talked about, where this is where the librarian really should have sat down and said, maybe we should keep this stuff together instead of supporting the Slavic collection over here.
the military history collection.
It went off to at least a half a dozen different divisions in the New York Public Library, which is massive.
Yeah.
And so you really don't have a sense of this collection as a collection.
And in the case of records, if they're not produced as freestanding items, if you take a record out of its original context, you really can't make it.
Then it will be greatly impoverished.
Besides provenance, one of the basic principles is it's the original order.
don't mess with the way the creator organized their records, because that reflects how they were using the information.
So context is everything.
Oh, yeah.
It's true.
Is it up to the archivist to determine context?
There is an archival activity, which you wouldn't know if I looked at my desk, that's called Perfecting the Arrangement.
And that is, if records come in that are obviously disordered,
We will try to figure out what was the original arrangement the creator used, and to the extent possible, put the records back into that arrangement.
But, yeah, the three-volume guide to what's in the National Archives is all arranged, except for the index at the end, by the agency that created the records.
I might just take a look at this.
Probably the last edition of that book that will ever come out.
It's published by the federal government?
Yeah.
Check this out at the Boston Public Library.
They're there at the Pository Library.
Yeah, they should have it.
It's published by J.P.O.
I believe.
A lot of our stuff, it should be there.
A lot of our stuff gets published by
the National Archives trust funders who doesn't necessarily go through DPL, but I'm pretty sure DPL has everything.
Listen, you've given me very generously.
It is generous.
But I'd love to be able to get in touch with you at some point.
I'll give you my card.
He's telling me about the records at the Archives of Salamanca.
The orders were actually written by King Philip II, who was meticulous.
They called him government by paper, as a matter of fact.
And he wrote very complete orders to the manager of this archives, including when he would be open, fees he would charge, and so on.
But also including specific orders that documents should be filed in sequence and joined together with red tape so that they would never get out of sequence.
Germany in October.
I went to the Gutenberg Museum in Mainz, and a young man who was showing me around said something about, Frederick II demanded, stipulated that all government records be written on vellum.
Are you familiar with that?
And not paper, because that paper was more perishable.
And I've been trying to document this darn thing.
I'm just wondering, are you familiar with that?
Well, I have some familiarity with that era, but I did my dissertation on it.
first century of pretty much scientific stuff.
But that one doesn't ring a bell.
Okay.